v1.1: Multi-index search (#2208)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/advanced/faceted_search.md

## Configuring and using facets

Like any other filter, attributes you want to use as facets must be added to the [`filterableAttributes`](/reference/api/settings.md#filterable-attributes) list in the index's settings before they can be used. Once they have been configured, you can search for facets with [the `facets` search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#facets).

::: warning
Synonyms don't apply to facets. Meaning, if you have `SF` and `San Francisco` set as synonyms, faceting by `SF` and `San Francisco` will show you different results.
:::

Suppose you have an ecommerce dataset called `ecommerce` containing the following fields:

```json
{
  "id": "711decb2a3fdcbbe44755afc5af25e2f",
  "title": "Kitchenex Stainless Steel Flatware Pie Server and Pie Cutter Set of 2",
  "description": "| The Kitchenex Stainless Pie Server|…",
  "url": "https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07D2LJFYW",
  "images": [
    "https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/41AeR2oo75L._.jpg"
  ],
  "category": "Home & Kitchen",
  "brand": "Dr. Pet",
  "price": 16.84,
  "rating": 4.7,
  "reviews_count": 7,

> }

Reviewer: I recommend simplifying this sample document:
- only show the minimum amount of fields required to establish the document as a webshop product;
- shorten the existing fields. The smaller they are, the easier it is for a reader to process and remember them;
- this one is arguable, but I would add a couple of documents to this. Like a minimal sample dataset. When I was writing the geosearch guide, I found it very helpful to have a small pool of data I could refer to across the text (e.g. "if you do this, then you will see productA and productB, but if you do that you will only see productC").

To illustrate:

```js
[
  {
    id: 1,
    title: "Leather jacket" ,
    brand: "Nike",
    category: "sportswear",
    price: 17.14
  },
  {
    id: 2,
    title: "Leather shoes" ,
    brand: "Adidas",
    category: "sportswear",
    price: 1.14
  },
]
```

```

The following code sample allows you to create facets for the `brand` and `rating` attributes:

<CodeSamples id="faceted_search_update_settings_1" />

The response shows `pie server` products along with two new fields: `facetDistribution` and `facetStats`:

```json
{
  "hits":[
    …
  ],
  "query":"pie server",
  "processingTimeMs":9,
  "limit":20,
  "offset":0,
  "estimatedTotalHits":25,
  "facetDistribution":{
    "brand":{
      "All Things Rae Dunn":1,
      "BEERBONG .COM":1,
      "Dr. Pet":1,
      …
      "senover":1
    },
    "rating":{
      "0":7,
      …
      "4.8":1,
      "5":3
    },
  },
  "facetStats":{
    "rating":{
      "min":0.0,
      "max":5.0
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: I think you could simplify this too. we don't need `limit`, `offset`, etc

### Facet distribution

The `facetDistribution` object contains the number of matching documents distributed among the values of a given facet. The `facets` search parameter expects an array of strings. Each string is an attribute present in the `filterableAttributes` list.

The following response shows the facet distribution when searching for `pie server`:

```json
{
  …
  "facetDistribution":{
    "brand":{
      "All Things Rae Dunn":1,
      "BEERBONG .COM":1,
      "Dr. Pet":1,
      …
      "senover":1
    },
    "rating":{
      "0":7,
      …
      "4.8":1,
      "5":3
    }
  }
  …

> }

Reviewer: If I were you, I would try to simplify this too. Perhaps showing the distribution for a single facet is better?

::: note
By default, `facets` returns a maximum of 100 facet values for each faceted field. You can change this value using the `maxValuesPerFacet` property of the [`faceting` index settings](/reference/api/settings.md#faceting).
:::

### Facet stats

When using the `facets` parameter, any matching documents with facets containing numeric values are displayed in a `facetStats` object. `facetStats` contains the numeric minimum (`min`) and maximum (`max`) values per facet for all documents matching the search query.

If none of the matching documents have a numeric value for a facet, that facet is not included in the `facetStats` object.

Meilisearch ignores string values like `"21"` when computing `facetStats`.

The following response shows the `facetStats` when searching for `pie server`:

```json
{
  …
  "facetStats":{
    "rating":{
      "min":0.0,
      "max":5.0
    }
  }
  …
}  
```

Since `rating` was the only numeric facet in our example, it is returned in the `facetStats` object.

## Facet types

### Single select facets

> Single-select facets allow the selection of a single value per facet. Using our `ecommerce` index, this means if you have a facet for `brand` with the values `BrandA`, `BrandB`, and `BrandC`. Single select facets will allow you to view products from one brand at a time. If you want to view `BrandA` and `BrandB` products, you will have to try both searches individually. If you want to further narrow down results using the `reviews` facet, you would need to do so separately for both brands.

Reviewer: I think we need to be a bit more didactic with this. First paragraph should be a clear sentence defining what single-select facets are in Meilisearch.

Second paragraph explains the use-case: "single-select facets are helpful when [something]".

Third paragraph is a bit longer and illustrates the use-case with our simplified sample dataset: "with single-select facets, clicking on 'Nike' and 'sportswear' will only show sportswear products with a 'Nike' brand." 

A video/gif illustrating this would be super helpful.

Reviewer: Oh, one last thing: explain what users need to do to use single-select facets with Meilisearch. Is it simply a matter of chaining filter with `AND` operators? Is it something else? Whatever it is, the user needs to know. (This also counts for multi-select facets)

### Multi-select facets

Multi-select facets allow users to choose multiple options within a facet so they don’t have to perform more than one search to find the products they’re looking for.

With single select facets, if a user selects `BrandA` for the `brands` facet, they will see it offers 5 products, nothing more. But with multi-select facets, we want to show users how many products `BrandB` and `BrandC` offer even when they're not selected. This way the user knows if other brands offer similar products and can view products from multiple brands at the same time.

The image below shows multi-select facets in action. Even though the user selected the `Lithonia Lighting` and `Sunlite` brands when searching for `LED`, they can see other brands and how many LED products they have.

> ![Meilisearch demo for multi-select facets searching for 'LED'](/faceted-search/facets-multi-select.png)

Reviewer: This section should mirror the single-select facets section as much as possible:

1. define multi-select search
2. explain use-case
3. illustrate use-case (and refer back to single-select if needed)

![Meilisearch demo for an ecommerce website displaying faceting UI](/faceted-search/facets-ecommerce.png)

Faceted search interfaces often have a count of how many results belong to each facet. This gives users a visual clue of the range of results available for each facet.

### Filters or facets

In Meilisearch, facets are a specific use-case of filters. The question of whether something is a filter or a facet is mostly one pertaining to UX and UI design.

Meilisearch does not differentiate between facets and filters. This means that, despite its name, facets can be used with any attributes added to `filterableAttributes`.

## Configuring and using facets

Like any other filter, attributes you want to use as facets must be added to the [`filterableAttributes`](/reference/api/settings.md#filterable-attributes) list in the index's settings before they can be used. Once they have been configured, you can search for facets with [the `facets` search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#facets).

::: warning
Synonyms don't apply to facets. Meaning, if you have `SF` and `San Francisco` set as synonyms, faceting by `SF` and `San Francisco` will show you different results.
:::

> Suppose you have an ecommerce dataset called `ecommerce` containing the following fields:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose you have an ecommerce dataset called `ecommerce` containing the following document shape:
```

Reviewer 3: FWIW, the docs already have a section on [document fields](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/core_concepts/documents.html#fields), whereas "document format" (I also tried "document shape") gave no relevant hit. 

I think "fields" is the appropriate term here.

If none of the matching documents have a numeric value for a facet, that facet is not included in the `facetStats` object.

Meilisearch ignores numeric strings like `"21"` when computing `facetStats`.

The following response shows the `facetStats` when searching for `classics`:

```json
{
  …
"facetStats":{
    "rating":{
      "min":2.5,
      "max":4.7
    }
  }
  …
}  
```

Since `rating` was the only numeric facet in our example, it is the only facet returned in the `facetStats` object.

## Facet types

### Conjunctive facets

Conjunctive facets use the `AND` logical operator. When users select one or more values for a facet, all returned results must contain the selected facet value(s).

With conjunctive facets, when a user selects `English` from the `language` facet, all returned books must be in English. If the user further narrows down the search by selecting `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`, all returned books must be in English and contain both `genres`.

```
# Filter expression as an array

> [language = English, genres = Fiction, genres = Literature]

Reviewer 4: To be a correct array format the expressions must be wrapped into string quotes

# Filter expression as a string

> language = English AND genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature

Reviewer 4: The whole expression here should be wrapped in string quotes

```

The GIF below shows how the facet count for `genres` updates to only include books that meet **all three conditions**.

![Selecting English books with 'Fiction' and 'Literature' as 'genres' for the books dataset](/faceted-search/conjunctive-factes.gif)

### Disjunctive facets

> Disjunctive facets use the `OR` logical operator. They allow users to choose multiple options within a facet, so they don’t have to perform more than one search to find the products they’re looking for.

Author: I was comparing it to conjunctive facets. When the user selects “genres=fiction AND genres=classics”, they will get books with only these genres.
If they want to look for “genres=magic”, they’ll need to do another search. Does that make sense?

Let's look at the `books` index from before with disjunctive facets. When the user selects `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`, Meilisearch returns all books that are either `Fiction`, `Literature`, or both:

```
# Filter expression as an array

> [[genres = Fiction, genres = Literature]]

Reviewer 4: To be a correct array format the expressions must be wrapped into string quotes

# Filter expression as a string

> genres = Fiction OR genres = Literature

Reviewer 4: The whole expression here should be wrapped in string quotes]

The code sample below shows the query for the search mentioned above:

<CodeSamples id="faceted_search_conjunctive_facets_1" />

### Multi-select facets

> Multi-select or disjunctive facets use the `OR` logical operator. They allow users to choose multiple options within a facet so they don’t have to perform more than one search to find the products they’re looking for.

Reviewer 5: Can we also add a line telling that a logical `AND` is done **between the categories**?

Author: Done ✅

> ### Using conjunctive and disjunctive facets

Reviewer 4: > [[language = English, language = French], [genres = Fiction, genres = Literature]

This is not equal to this

> language = English OR language = French AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)

Let's look at the `books` index with both conjunctive and disjunctive facets. The user selects `English` and `French` from the `language` facet, and then narrows down the search to include `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`:

```
# Filter expression as an array

> [[language = English, language = French], [genres = Fiction, genres = Literature]

Reviewer 4: To be a correct array format the expressions must be wrapped into string quotes

# Filter expression as a string

> language = English OR language = French AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)

Reviewer 4: The whole expression here should be wrapped in string quotes

Reviewer 4: The parenthiseses are not placed correctly

> "(language = English OR language = French) AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)"

Reviewer 4: These two are still not similar 😅

Author: updated

<CodeSamples id="faceted_search_disjunctive_facets_1" />

> To learn more about implementing faceting and filtering, check out our [ecommerce demo](https://github.com/meilisearch/ecommerce-demo).

Author: @Strift
I linked the GitHub repository here so readers have access to both the repo and demo.

Reviewer 6: Thank you for the heads up!

::: note
By default, `facets` returns a maximum of 100 facet values for each faceted field. You can change this value using the `maxValuesPerFacet` property of the [`faceting` index settings](/reference/api/settings.md#faceting).
:::

### Facet stats

When using the `facets` parameter, any matching documents with facets containing numeric values are displayed in a `facetStats` object. `facetStats` contains the numeric minimum (`min`) and maximum (`max`) values per facet for all documents matching the search query. This can be used to create a range slider component allowing users to select a range of values for a facet.

If none of the matching documents have a numeric value for a facet, that facet is not included in the `facetStats` object.

Meilisearch ignores string values like `"21"` when computing `facetStats`.

The following response shows the `facetStats` when searching for `led`:

```json
{
  …
  "facetStats":{
    "rating":{
      "min":0.0,
      "max":5.0
    }
  }
  …
}  
```

Since `rating` was the only numeric facet in our example, it is returned in the `facetStats` object.

## Facet types

### Single select facets

> Single-select or conjunctive facets use the `AND` logical operator. They only allow the selection of a single value per facet.

Reviewer 4: This is confusing. I'm not sure this is the case, nor if this concept exists. It also implies you can only select one facet.

I don't think we should use `single-select` wording. Instead `conjunctive facet search`.

Suppose your `ecommerce` index contains a facet for `brand` with the values `BrandA`, `BrandB`, and `BrandC`. Single select facets will allow you to view products from one brand at a time. If you want to view `BrandA` and `BrandB` products, you will have to try both searches individually. If you want to further narrow down results using the `reviews` facet, you would need to do so separately for both brands.

The image below shows single-select facets in action. When the user searches for `led` and selects `Sunlite`, other brands are no longer visible.

> ![Meilisearch demo for single-select facets searching for 'LED'](/faceted-search/facets-single-select.png)

Reviewer 2: Great to see an image here 🌟! Gifs could even be better

The code sample below shows the query for the search mentioned above:

<CodeSamples id="faceted_search_conjunctive_facets_1" />

> ### Multi-select facets

Reviewer 2: cc @meilisearch/devrel-team I think this is something to explain in a tutorial for users who do not use instant-meilisearch

Reviewer 7: Could you elaborate @gmourier ? DO you think the current guide is not enough?

Reviewer 2: Sure! The current documentation guide does not explain how to do it; it explains the general concept from the end-users standpoint.

It's natively done by instant-meilisearch using the multi-search API endpoint. Still, if you use anything other than that, you will have to implement the glue instant-meilisearch does to achieve that, and adding that tutorial could be super helpful for users.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @gmourier 

After reading that part, I don't think I understand the concept. Also, it is mixing two things. The normal disjunctive facet search, and the "cool behavior" facet search.

The title should mention that this part is about disjunctive facet search.

This part should then: 
1. introduce the normal disjunctive facet search.
2. Mention that you can improve the behavior by using the following concept (from chat GPT):

> Multi-select faceting can be designed in various ways, depending on the specific use case and the preferences of the users. One possible approach is to keep the facet count visible even after the user selects one or more facets. This means that the user can see how many results are associated with each facet, and how many of those results match the other facets that have been selected.

> For example, if the user selects "Nike" and "Adidas" as brands, the facet count for each brand would show how many results are associated with each brand. If there are 200 total results, and 100 are Nike shoes and 50 are Adidas shoes, the facet counts would show "Nike (100)" and "Adidas (50)". If the user then selects "sneakers" as a style, the facet counts for brands would update to show how many of the Nike and Adidas shoes are also sneakers. For example, it might show "Nike (80)" and "Adidas (30)", indicating that 80 of the 100 Nike shoes and 30 of the 50 Adidas shoes are sneakers.

> By keeping the facet count visible, the user can make more informed decisions about which facets to select or deselect, based on how many results each facet is associated with and how those results overlap with other selected facets. This can help the user quickly refine their search results to find the most relevant items.

Author: Added an example for the cool behavior

Reviewer: The @meilisearch/docs-team discussed this internally and while we agree this guide does not cover the described implementation (aka "The Cool Behaviour"), we don't think it should. This page is supposed to be a general overview of faceting, teaching users fundamental faceting details. Our intended target are users who are not familiar with faceting.

The behaviour described by @bidoubiwa and @gmourier is relatively advanced and falls outside this goal. Trying to fit it in this article would result in a guide that gets confusing to new users towards the end (which was incidentally my own experience when reviewing it), and that does not cover the cool behaviour with the attention it deserves.

So, to hopefully reach a compromise that leaves everyone satisfied, we suggest:

1. Replace an extensive description of the behaviour with a very short paragraph and a code sample indicating the possible interactions between multi-index search and different types of facets;
2. Create a tutorial teaching users how to create the interface described by @bidoubiwa and @gmourier. We will coordinate with the @meilisearch/devrel-team to see whether this is a better fit for the blog or the docs.

Reviewer 7: Thanks @guimachiavelli! I would be happy to hear more about the guide when you'll have time to discuss cc @Strift

> Multi-select or disjunctive facets use the `OR` logical operator. They allow users to choose multiple options within a facet so they don’t have to perform more than one search to find the products they’re looking for. You can use the `AND` operator to allow users to select different facets. For example, LED lights from the  brand `Sunlite` within the `Tools & Home Improvement` category:

Author: ```suggestion
Multi-select or disjunctive facets use the `OR` logical operator. They allow users to choose multiple options within a facet, so they don’t have to perform more than one search to find the products they’re looking for. You can use the `AND` operator to allow users to select different facets. For example, LED lights from the brand `Sunlite` within the `Tools & Home Improvement` category:
```

### Combining conjunctive and disjunctive facets

It is possible to create search queries with both conjunctive and disjunctive facets.

For example, a user might select `English` and `French` from the `language` facet so they can see books written either in English or in French. This query uses an `OR` operator and is a disjunctive facet:

```
"language = English OR language = French"
```

The same user might also be interested in literary fiction books and select `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`. Since the user wants a specific combination of genres, their query uses an `AND` operator:

```
"genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature"
```

The user can combine these two filter expressions in one by wrapping them in parentheses and using an `AND` operator:

```
"(language = English OR language = French) AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)"
```

The GIF below shows the `books` dataset with conjunctive and disjunctive facets. Notice how the facet count for each facet updates based on the selection.

![Selecting 'Fiction' and 'Literature' as 'genres' for English books](/faceted-search/conjunctive-and-disjunctive-facets.gif)

> ::: tip Improving user experience

Reviewer 3: As a reader of the documentation, I don't really understand how using multi search helps improving user experience, is this related to the "cool behavior"?

I see this was discussed in https://github.com/meilisearch/documentation/pull/2208#discussion_r1150909298 already, with @guimachiavelli asking we remove the tip. I think achieving the "cool behavior" is rather integral to faceted search for e-commerce sites, so I'd rather we keep this even in a limited form.

On the other hand we could also leave this tip out entirely and revisit this documentation to add a link to a full-fledged blogpost about faceted search for e-commerce (that would include an explanation of the "cool behavior") once such a blogpost is ready.

Author: It is related to the "cool behavior". Initially, the tip was too detailed, and we felt it was out of scope of this guide. [See comment](https://github.com/meilisearch/documentation/pull/2208#discussion_r1151947741)
Let's go with removing the tip for now, then. We can revisit after and add a more detailed explanation or link to a blog or tutorial (when we have one).

```
# Filter expression as an array
[["genres = Fiction", "genres = Literature"]]

# Filter expression as a string
"genres = Fiction OR genres = Literature"
```

The GIF below shows the `books` dataset with disjunctive facets. Notice how the facet count for `genres` updates based on the selection.

![Selecting 'Fiction' and 'Literature' as 'genres' for the books dataset](/faceted-search/disjunctive_facets.gif)

### Using conjunctive and disjunctive facets

Let's look at the `books` index with both conjunctive and disjunctive facets. The user selects `English` and `French` from the `language` facet, and then narrows down the search to include `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`:

```
# Filter expression as an array
[["language = English", "language = French"], "genres = Fiction", "genres = Literature"]

# Filter expression as a string
"(language = English OR language = French) AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)"
```

![Selecting 'Fiction' and 'Literature' as 'genres' for English books](/faceted-search/conjunctive-and-disjunctive-facets.gif)

::: tip Improving user experience

> Most ecommerce websites use different ways for handling facet counts depending on their use case. By keeping the facet count visible, you allow the user to make more informed decisions. They can select or deselect different facets based on how many results they get for each facet and how those results overlap with other selected facets. This can help the user quickly refine their search results to find the most relevant items.

Reviewer 4: > Most ecommerce websites use different ways for handling facet counts depending on their use case. By keeping the facet count visible, you allow the user to make more informed decisions.

Bit of a strange context switch between the two sentences. It should introduce `one of the best ways to handle it is by keeping the facet count visible [...]`

Reviewer 4: This part of the chatGPT explaination is maybe a better introduction 

> Multi-select faceting can be designed in various ways, depending on the specific use case and the preferences of the users. One possible approach is to keep the facet count visible even after the user selects one or more facets. This means that the user can see how many results are associated with each facet, and how many of those results match the other facets that have been selected.

> Let's look at the `books` index again. If the user selects `English` and `French` as languages, the facet count for each language updates to show the number of books available in that language. For this example it updates to: `English:10` and `French:2`. If the user then selects `Fiction` from the `genres` facets, the facet count for each genre updates to show how many `Fiction` books are available in English and French. For this example it updates to: `English:8` and `French:2`. This means 8 of the 10 English books and both French books have the `Fiction` genre. Note that the facet count is not impacted by filters on its own facet values.

Reviewer 4: >  If the user selects `English` and `French` as languages, the facet count for each language updates to show the number of books available in that language. 

Not sure I understand this sentence

Author: updated

:::

### Facet stats

When using the `facets` parameter, any matching documents with facets containing numeric values are displayed in a `facetStats` object. `facetStats` contains the numeric minimum (`min`) and maximum (`max`) values per facet for all documents matching the search query. This can be used to create components like range sliders allowing users to select a range of values for a facet.

If none of the matching documents have a numeric value for a facet, that facet is not included in the `facetStats` object.

::: note
Meilisearch ignores numeric strings like `"21"` when computing `facetStats`.
:::

The following response shows the `facetStats` when searching for `classics`:

```json
{
  …
"facetStats":{
    "rating":{
      "min":2.5,
      "max":4.7
    }
  }
  …
}  
```

Since `rating` was the only numeric facet in our example, it is the only facet returned in the `facetStats` object.

## Facet types

### Conjunctive facets

Conjunctive facets use the `AND` logical operator. When users select one or more values for a facet, all returned results must contain the selected facet value(s).

> With conjunctive facets, when a user selects `English` from the `language` facet, all returned books must be in English. If the user further narrows down the search by selecting `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`, all returned books must be in English and contain both `genres`.

Author: I'll have to record a new GIF if we change the example 🫣
Let's keep it. Besides, it shows how the facet count updates with each selection

"language = English AND genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature"
```

The GIF below shows how the facet count for `genres` updates to only include books that meet **all three conditions**.

![Selecting English books with 'Fiction' and 'Literature' as 'genres' for the books dataset](/faceted-search/conjunctive-factes.gif)

### Disjunctive facets

Disjunctive facets use the `OR` logical operator. They allow users to choose multiple options within a facet, so they don’t have to perform more than one search to find the products they’re looking for.

Let's look at the `books` index from before with disjunctive facets. When the user selects `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`, Meilisearch returns all books that are either `Fiction`, `Literature`, or both:

```
# Filter expression as an array
[["genres = Fiction", "genres = Literature"]]

# Filter expression as a string
"genres = Fiction OR genres = Literature"
```

The GIF below shows the `books` dataset with disjunctive facets. Notice how the facet count for `genres` updates based on the selection.

![Selecting 'Fiction' and 'Literature' as 'genres' for the books dataset](/faceted-search/disjunctive_facets.gif)

> ### Using conjunctive and disjunctive facets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Combining conjunctive and disjunctive facets
```

> Let's look at the `books` index with both conjunctive and disjunctive facets. The user selects `English` and `French` from the `language` facet, and then narrows down the search to include `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`:
> 
> ```
> # Filter expression as an array
> [["language = English", "language = French"], "genres = Fiction", "genres = Literature"]
> 
> # Filter expression as a string
> "(language = English OR language = French) AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)"
> ```

Reviewer: I was a bit confused when I reached this section, as I didn't initially understand it was about chaining filter expressions.

I propose holding the user's hand a bit more through each step:

````suggestion
It is possible to create search queries with both conjunctive and disjunctive facets. 

For example, a user might select `English` and `French` from the `language` facet so they can see books written either in English or in French. This query uses an `OR` operator and is a disjunctive facet:

```sql
language = English OR language = French
```

The same user might also be interested in literary fiction books and select `Fiction` and `Literature` as `genres`. Since the user wants a specific combination of genres, their query uses an AND operator:

```sql
genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature

The user can combine these two filter expressions in one by wrapping them in parentheses and using an `AND` operator:

```sql
(language = English OR language = French) AND (genres = Fiction AND genres = Literature)
```
````
